## Introductions

Greetings, my name is Calvin Willoughby. I have recently finished my pursuit of a bachelor’s degree in computer science. In this pursuit, I have explored a great variety of fields in computer science. I have learned about I.T., data mining, website design, mobile design, and even computer graphics just to name a few. As I experienced each field, I didn’t just learn technical information or how to code. I also learned how to work in the computer science industry.

I took an entire class on collaboration and teamwork. In it, the students had to work together and contribute to a GitHub repository like actual developers. I also learned about secure coding, protecting your software from vulnerabilities attackers could exploit. I am familiar with the Agile and Waterfall software development process models as well. 

Moving on, experiencing multiple computer science fields has helped me discover where I excel. I have developed strong skills in back-end software engineering. I am not only confident in my abilities, but I enjoy it as well. Because of this, a career in back-end software engineering has become my professional goal. I am also interested in app design. 

Don’t let my confidence in my software engineering skills lead you to believe they are the only skills I have developed. For example, I have also become skilled at algorithms and data structures, and I am good at database management as well. I have worked on databases with SQL and Mongodb. In this portfolio, I have included three artifacts that will showcase my skills in software engineering, algorithms and data structures, and databases. 

The first artifact will showcase my skills in software engineering. The artifact is a simple riddle game made with Java in the Eclipse IDE. The second artifact will showcase my skills in algorithms and data structures. The artifact is a Python script designed to make CRUD operations in a specific Mongodb database more convenient. The final artifact is a collection from a Mongodb database. Clearly, it will showcase my skills with databases. Together, these artifacts will give you a feel for the range of my skills in computer science. 

You can use the [editor on GitHub](https://github.com/CalvinWi/CalvinWi.github.io/edit/master/index.md) to maintain and preview the content for your website in Markdown files.

You can see the json file I created to show my skills with Mongodb and database management [here](https://github.com/CalvinWi/mongodb-books-collection).

Whenever you commit to this repository, GitHub Pages will run [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/) to rebuild the pages in your site, from the content in your Markdown files.


### Artifact One  -  Software Design and Engineering 

To access the code for this artifact, click [here](https://github.com/CalvinWi/riddle-game-artifact.git).

For my software engineering artifact, I have created a riddle game that requires the user to create an account and login before being able to play. The login feature stores both a username and associated password in a hashmap. The riddle game consists of three riddles with the solution presented in a multiple-choice format; users choose one of the provided possible solutions that they think is correct. Users must solve the riddle they are on before they can move on to the next riddle. I created the riddle game a few months ago; it seemed like a simple way to demonstrate my software engineering skills. 

Moving on, I chose the riddle game as my software engineering artifact because while the game itself is simple to play, it requires complex logic in order to function. It is this logic that shows the depth of my understanding of software development. The major components of the artifact are while loops and if/else statements. Many of the if/else statements are contained in the while loops. My extensive use of the loops and conditional statements to create a simple riddle game shows that I have a strong grasp on the logic of programming loops and conditionals, and I understand well how the compiler reads computer code. 

When I improved my riddle game, I first removed redundant code I found when I performed a code review. I then added more comments and improved existing comments to increase my code’s readability for other developers. I was careful, however, not to add too many comments, knowing it would hinder readability. I then added the login feature that prevents users from playing the game without logging into an account. 

To continue, when I made my riddle game artifact, I expected it to demonstrate my ability to use well-founded techniques, skills, and tools to create a valuable artifact. I also expected it to demonstrate my ability to develop a security mindset and be on the lookout for vulnerabilities in my code. I believe the riddle game does meet my first expectation; I used well-founded programming techniques and skills along with the Eclipse IDE to create what I consider to be a valuable artifact.

I also believe my riddle game meets second expectation but not as well as I initially planned. The login feature adds a simple layer of security that prevents any user from playing the riddle game without logging in to an account, but the riddle game stores user passwords unencrypted. I am aware this is a severe vulnerability. I originally wanted to hash all of the stored passwords, but I was unable to accomplish that goal in the timeframe I had to develop the login feature.

The riddle game artifact was a rewarding experience once I finally completed it. I learned a great deal. I further developed my understanding of the logic of loops and conditional statements. I also learned something new; I learned about hashmaps, which are the Java equivalent of dictionaries. I did not know that Java does not have dictionaries like other programming languages until I began working on this artifact. 

Finally, while the artifact was an extremely rewarding experience, it was also easily the most challenging and time-consuming artifact I worked on. My first challenge was created when I overthought the development of my artifact. I tried to develop something far too complex than I needed to or should have. It made the development of the artifact too difficult to handle and cost me a great deal of time. Dumbing the artifact down was also its own time-consuming challenge. I think it provided an excellent learning experience, though, because many software engineering best practices include some form of phrase advocating keeping code simple. I always thought that would be easy, but I realize now that it’s actually quite the challenge to create a complex project with simple code. The biggest challenge I faced was hashing the stored passwords in the login feature. As can be seen in the artifact, it was a challenge I was not able to overcome. Hashing is something I will need to study more of in the future. 


### Artifact Two  -  Algorithms and Data Structures

To access the code for this artifact, click [here](https://github.com/CalvinWi/books-CRUD.git).
This file only works with the books.json file from my third artifact. You can find the file [here](https://github.com/CalvinWi/mongodb-books-collection.git).

To begin, for my algorithms and data structures artifact, I have created a Python script that interacts with the “books” collection in my "MyBookReadingList" database. The script only works with the “books” collection, but the collection can be imported to any local Mongodb database. In the script, there are four functions: one for each CRUD operation. The user chooses which of the operations they want to perform and provides any relevant information. The purpose of the script is to make it easier for users to perform CRUD operations on the “books” collection. It saves the user the trouble of entering the commands manually and with the correct syntax. I created the script a couple of days ago. I waited until recently to make it because I was focused on the artifact I knew would be a time-consuming challenge for me: the riddle game.

Moving on, I chose to create this artifact after deciding to make my "MyBookReadingList" database for my database artifact. I had yet to come up with an artifact that would demonstrate my skills with algorithms. I remembered how tedious it was to manually insert every document into a database and that it was frustrating when I made a small typo that made me have to retype an entire insert-document command. It wasn’t long before I realized I could make algorithms to perform CRUD operations on a Mongodb database as my algorithms and data structures artifact. The major components of my Python script that showcase my skills are the four CRUD functions I created. Each function is an algorithm that takes input from the user and reads from or writes to the “books” collection in my "MyBookReadingList" Mongodb database. When I created this artifact, it was meant to enhance my database artifact, so there were no improvements made to the Python script, since the script itself is an improvement. That being said, after the script was functional, I did take the time to make the styling of the code consistent throughout the script, and I added comments to further improve readability. 

To continue, I excpected this artifact to demonstrate my ability to evaulate problems and develop solutions using algorithms. The script does meet that expectation. The script solves the problem of having to tediously enter Mongodb commands manually by using algorithms to automatically enter some of the command information, simplify entering the information that still needs to be manually entered, and reduce the amount of typos created by the user.

I actually really enjoyed developing this Python script more than I thought I would. It was really fun to create a script that could interact with my Mongodb database. The development wasn’t too challenging either. The process served as a good review of Mongodb and Python. I hadn’t used Python in a while when I started working on the script. The biggest learning experience I had was with Pymongo and exception handling. I struggled with Pymongo when I learned about it in a past college course. After working on the script, though, I feel like I’m becoming more comfortable and confident with Pymongo. Exception handling is also something I’ve had difficulties with in the past. The material on exception handling I’ve read hasn’t helped me to understand it very well. However, I think I’ve done a good job with exception handling in this Python script.

Finally, the challenges I faced when making my Python script weren’t too difficult to overcome, but they were numerous. In every function I developed, there were commands that didn’t perform correctly or didn’t work with a certain input type. It took a lot of trial and error to get the code just right. I didn’t mind the work, though, because it provided a challenge that wasn’t frustrating. It was like solving a puzzle. Other than that, the biggest challenge was taking user input and plugging it into Mongodb commands. Some functions were easy, and others were tricky. For example, in the update and delete operations, I had to limit the user to searching for the document they wanted to work on with the “Title” key. Also, the update function only allows the user to update one key/value pair at a time. If a user has multiple key/value pairs to update, they will have to rerun the script for each one. Lastly, the read function only allows the user to make a simple, single-key query. Despite all of that, however, I am still very proud of my Python script. This artifact was definitely my favorite to work on. 


### Artifact Three  -  Databases

To access the code for this artifact, click [here](https://github.com/CalvinWi/mongodb-books-collection.git).

For my database artifact, I chose my database “MyBookReadingList.” It is a Mongodb database containing the collection “books.” Each document in the collection contains information about one of the books I want to read, including information like the book’s title, author, year of publication, etc. Together, the documents form my personal reading list. This database was made a few months ago. It ended up being an excellent learning exercise because I had to learn how to setup Mongodb on my personal computer and review some of the material I learned in my Mongodb class.

Moving on, I chose "MyBookReadingList" for my eportfolio to show that I know how to create and manage databases in Mongodb. The documents in the database showcase my skills. I improved the database by adding more information to each document, adding more documents, and creating indices to optimize querying. I was careful in creating indices. I chose to only create three indices since I know too many indices can negatively impact the time it takes to write to the database. I chose each index to be for a single key I anticipated I would query often. I made an index for the title, author, and genre keys since I imagine I will search the database often for specific titles, authors, and genres. Unfortunately, I cannot show these indices to anyone because indices do not get exported with the collection when one exports a collection in Mongodb.

I originally planned to demonstrate well-founded techniques with databases like I demonstrated well-founded techniques with software engineering in my first artifcat. I believe the database I created does succeed in accomplishing my goal because it demonstrates my ability to use Mongodb and database management techniques/strategies.

The biggest challenge I faced working on my database artifact was setting up Mongodb on my own system. Installing Mongodb and configuring it correctly took several online guides. In the process, though, I learned about Mongo Compass and how to use it. Mongo Compass is a GUI for Mongodb, and it provides some ease of use features for Mongodb once one gets a feel for it. Another challenge I faced was updating documents in the database. I remembered most of the Mongodb commands after a quick review, but the command I thought would update the documents wouldn’t work. After some studying, I was able to work out the correct command. Other than that, everything went smoothly. The database was a fun project to develop.

